[music]
This is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations [music] with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, [music] its business model,
its competitive advantages, and what
makes it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here [music]
to bring them to you. To find more
episodes of breakdowns, check out join
colossus.com.
All opinions [music] expressed by hosts
and podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers, or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities [music]
discussed in this podcast. This podcast
is forformational purposes only and
should not be relied upon as a basis for
investment [music] decisions.
This is Matt Russell and today we are
breaking down GE Aerospace. Now if you
go by tickers, we did break down GE
several years ago, but that episode
focused on how Larry Culp at the time
was turning around that Titanic that was
GE the conglomerate. Today, Romesh
Narana Swami, co-founder and portfolio
manager of Tubian Partners, join me to
go deeper on what is now a pure play
aerospace business. So, we get into some
of the unique dynamics of the supply
chain in aerospace, the long cycle
nature that differentiates it from many
other industries that you look at. And I
marvel a bit on the complexity that is
aircraft engine manufacturing, but not
for long because this is another
beautiful example of selling services
attached to equipment. And I first met
Romesh back in the summer of 2024 at a
business breakdowns event. It did not
take long for me to appreciate his
approach around finding these businesses
with unique scarcity or scale benefits.
and I finally got him on business
breakdowns. So, please enjoy our
conversation on GE Aerospace.
All right, Romesh, I am pumped to have
you here. We're covering GE Aerospace
today and some listeners may remember we
covered GE just a couple of years ago.
This was prior to the spin-offs and
having these pure play entities. We
thought it was a good opportunity to
come back to this name, particularly I
think with how the story has played out
over the past few years and even prior
to that episode we did initially. I
thought the best place to start was just
a reintroduction to GE, but specifically
GE Aerospace,
and just a small simple explanation of
what it is that they do, maybe what they
sell, give some context about where they
operate in the aerospace spectrum.
>> Well, thank you for having me, Matt.
First of all, uh it's really exciting to
discuss aeros
>> in terms of what G Aerospace does. At
its core, they sell jet engines for both
commercial as well as defense and
military applications. The total fleet
of GE aerospace engines is about 70,000
which is broken down roughly between
commercial and military. 45,000 engines
in the commercial application space and
25,000 engines in the military space. So
taking it one by one on the commercial
side if you look at the 45,000 engines
that are in service. If you look at the
aircraft that they touch, GE powers
something like three out of four all
commercial takeoffs pretty much every
day. And it includes a mix of engines
where they are the sole source provider
of an engine for an aircraft as well as
programs where they have a holistic kind
of market position. Within commercial
aircraft, there are three subsegments.
One is a narrow body segment. Think
short hall like New York Chicago kind of
flights. here. Their older generation
engines are called CFM56,
which is sort of an industry benchmark.
It's got a very long-standing reputation
for quality and reliability and
performance. It powers all Boeing 737s,
the entire family, and just over half of
the Airbus C20 family. And this is the
engine that has been in production for a
while and now is sunsetting. Their newer
engines, which is currently in
production, it's called LEAP, short for
leading edge aerospace propulsion. And
these are engines that power the Boeing
737 Max. Again, a sole source position.
And the Chinese COMAC C919, also a
sleource position. So, pretty much 100%
market shares there. And just over half
or 60% of the Airbus 320 Neo family.
Overall, in the narrow body segment, G
has something like a 70% share of that
space. On the widebody side, which is
longhaul flights, think London to Tokyo.
They have something like a 50% share of
the widebody fleet and backlog. Here
you're talking about aircraft like the
Boeing 787 where GE engine is called the
Gen X which got something like an 80%
share of the backlog and also the Boeing
77 where G90 is the engine also
something like 80% share and the Boeing
7X when it does enter into service G9X
is going to be the sole source engine
for that for that program fairly
dominant positions in a geopolistic
landscape within the wide body space and
finally to round up They also sell
engines for regional jets and business
jets. This is things like Bombardier
aircraft, the passport engine and Embraa
which is a CF-34 series. So within the
commercial side, they're fairly well
balanced. Half of their exposure is
through narrow bodies, about 35% is
through wide bodies and about 15% is
through regional and business jets. Of
those three categories, the widebody
engines maybe slightly less share, but
it's making up a big chunk of that
revenue. Widebody engines, are they any
more or less profitable than narrow
body? Is there a distinction that you
would make between those two categories
in terms of what is maybe a higher
quality business line?
Historically the narrow body side has
been more scaled because of the sole
source position that they have with
Boeing which is roughly half the market
and they have significant shares or
nearly half to 60% share on the Airbus
family. So the narrow body has been the
key driver for GEO the long term. They
go to market on the narrow body side
through a joint venture with Saffron
called CFM International which has been
one of the most successful aviation
franchises in history. In terms of
profitability, there is no meaningful
difference. Both wide bodies and narrow
bodies are profitable. Something like a
20% share. Though I would guess that
just given the way the cash flows work
in terms of the old fleet retiring and
the new fleet coming on at different
points in time, the narrow body fleet
might be more profitable for them by a
few percentage points perhaps. But
despite the difference in sort of the
market position, G has done a phenomenal
job in delivering sort of 20% kind of
overall margins across those programs.
>> And then the military exposure as well.
How would you frame that in terms of
exposure and share to the extent that
they disclose that?
>> On the military side, it's more useful
to think about much more programs and
platforms they are on. So on the
military side, they have something like
25,000 engines in their fleet. This
includes engines for programs like the
FA18, Hornet, Super Hornet, fighter
aircraft. It also includes nearly
twothirds of all US military aircraft,
including helicopters. So, it's a fairly
diversified portfolio. One thing I would
note is that GE has not been as scaled
as somebody like a Prattton Whitney on
the defense side. Historically, for
example, they have lost out on the F-35
fighter program in terms of being able
to provide the engines. track provides
engine there. Program by program, there
can be changes. The overall market share
is probably not as good a metric and
it's much more useful to look at program
participation in key programs that
they're on.
>> Is there anything else besides those two
lines that GE still has?
>> They do have uh defense and propulsion
technologies business. So outside of the
defense programs something like 12 to
15% of the business is in propulsion
technologies which includes things like
aircraft equipment businesses that go
into both commercial military
applications but overall in terms of the
revenue mix commercial is overwhelmingly
nearly 85% of revenues and in terms of
profitability even more pronounced. I
would also add that they do report
insurance revenues which is sort of a
legacy part of GE given their intense
transformation over the last few years
and about 10% less than 10% now about
mids single digit% of their overall
revenues comes from insurance though
that is now been run off so it is not
really a portion of the business where
they committing new capital to
>> just to give some scale around the
revenue base today how big are they from
a topline perspective
This year they'll report something like
40 billion in revenues of which 75% is
commercial engines and services and 25%
is defense and propulsion technologies.
Due to the difference in profitability
the commercial engine services business
is 25% kind of operating margins. The
other businesses defense and propulsion
technologies tend to be more like 11 12%
margins. So in terms of earnings
contribution, you're really looking at a
commercial engine franchise here in GE.
>> I assume that the way that these cycles
work, particularly with either
replacements or new fleets coming out,
you have pretty good visibility just in
terms of backlog and deliveries or that
revenue number and where it goes over
the next couple of years.
>> Absolutely. So if you look at how the
aftermarket works, 70% of G's revenues
overall comes from services which is
very predictable spare parts revenues
and services revenues from the install
base. Typically engines are mandated to
come in for overhauls and shop visits
just from a safety and regulatory
perspective. So this gives rise to an
extremely predictable earning stream in
the aftermarket which also tends to be
the more profitable earning stream. And
just on the backlog point, I understand
it's a smaller percentage of revenue
relative to services, but can you
contextualize what backlog looks like
now and maybe how that compares to
history and whatever framing that you
think would be most effective?
>> Absolutely. And the backlog is one of
the more interesting underpinnings of
G's 5 to 10 year outlook. Their current
backlog is something like $175 billion.
On a headline basis, that's 4 and a half
yearsish of revenues. But underneath
that, there are a few nuances. So if you
strip out just the commercial backlog,
which obviously is the uh majority of
the business, that's closer to six
years. And within that, if you take out
just the services element of revenues,
which obviously is the key profit tool
that GE Aerospace enjoys, that's closer
to 7 years. So we have a very unusually
long backlog and visibility for GE. And
to put it in context, uh this is not
unusual in the supply chain. If you look
at the airframers themselves, both
Airbus and Boeing with their current
production rates, they're running at
close to a decade's worth of backlog. So
very strong visibility throughout the OE
as well as the engine ecosystem. And
relative to let's say 5 years ago, 10
years ago, do those numbers in terms of
four times, you know, current revenue,
10 years of backlog for the airframers,
are those meaningfully higher, lower in
line with where they've been
historically?
>> I would say they're moderately higher
than historical averages, but not
substantially. So aerospace generally
has very long-term cycles and that
allows these companies to a have
significant backlogs and visibility in
terms of how these engines are produced
because they need to tie in with the
airframers in terms of their production.
They're very closely net uh in the
supply chain. And secondly, because of
the increasing prevalence of long-term
service agreements, that is also ticked
up in terms of how much the backlog
gives you the visibility for.
>> And for a business like GE, I can hear
the essentially again I'll use the the
simple numbers of somewhere in four to
five times uh revenue in terms of
backlog. four years worth. Um, looking
out. Are is that lumpy in terms of
seeing, you know, major
realization of backlog two years out,
but maybe you have a a slow year next
year? Like, does the lumpiness drive
anything or is it realized pretty uh
evenly over the course of those four
years?
>> That's a good question. uh on the
services side of things which is
something like 70% of the backlog you
should see a fairly predictable steady
evolution of the burn rate so to speak
of the backlog converting into revenues
on the OE side uh that is somewhat
lumpier that because that sort of ties
into production rates at uh Boeing and
Airbus and if there are any issues in
terms of either the supply chain or
their production run rates you will see
some lumpiness but given that Both
Boeing since the sort of issues they've
had in the last few years, it's been
fixed and Airbus as well has been on a
pretty good rhythm. I would say both the
OE and the services backlog today uh
seem well positioned to have a fairly
steady cadence over the next 5 to 10
years. This is outside of things like
pandemics and recessions so to speak. So
on a run rate normalized basis uh we
should be able to see a fairly steady
growth uh of that of that revenue and
earnings.
>> Yeah. and calendar years, quarters
shouldn't matter as much as they do
sometimes in the markets. Many times
investors will see through, but it's
interesting to note and to hear uh
nonetheless.
Maybe we could do a revisit to the GE
pure play story. We captured it to some
extent in the previous episode, but it's
played out even more. We don't have to
spend too much time on the origin
stories of GE. We can hit on that. I
want to talk a little bit about Larry
Colt in particular and some of the moves
that he's made. Do your best to just
outline some of the key milestones and
things that really were done that moved
the Titanic around when it was
struggling for so long.
>> G goes back more than 100 years. It's a
company that dates back to none other
than sort of Thomas Edison. For most of
the previous couple of decades, G was
probably the very definition of a
conglomerate with a very diverse
portfolio of businesses operating in
industrials, in healthcare and in
financial services. But if you look at
business history, there are very few
things as reliable as a cycle of
conglomeration and then the
conglomeration. And under the time of
Jack Welsh and Jeff EML, their eras were
defined by a focus on growth, on market
share through acquisitions. and what I
would call earnings per share management
and a big part was played by GE Capital
which exposed a lot of leverage in the
system and that the various businesses
were housed under GE were competing for
capital and there was no true business
rationale holding them together. Now all
of that changed with the arrival of
Larry Kulp who was really the first
outsider CEO at GE. Kulp was on the
board at GE during the brief tenure of
John Flannry and he took over as CEO in
October 2018. Now KP for those who
follow industrials businesses is a very
well-known and proven operator and
capital allocator and had a fantastic
performance both operationally and stock
price-wise at Danahare where he was CEO
from 20201 to circa 2014. So if GE
needed to deconglomerate then Larry Culp
was the perfect choice.
>> Maybe you can detail some of the steps
that he took in that deonglomeration.
It goes beyond that in terms of how the
operational execution has played out.
What would you point to? Cuz I think the
track record from Tanaher was there to
point to but he certainly followed
through with some of the execution on
the GE side. In simple terms, I would
say Larry brought the Kaizen like lean
manufacturing principles that he was so
successful implementing at Danaha to GE
to use a sort of Japanese phrase he
walked the gimba as they call it i.e. go
to the place where the value is being
added, the manufacturing floor, the shop
floor and really focus on very basic
ideas of continuous improvement, problem
solving and more importantly addressed
the don't shoot the messenger culture
which was badly needed at GE and also
crucially focused on the customer. I
think I've heard Larry describe his
philosophy as common sense vigorously
applied, which is probably a good
phrasing of what he did at GE. And for
GE in particular, that meant
simplification and deconglomeration and
focus. So he spun off the healthcare
assets as GE healthcare, the power
businesses as GE Vernova, focused on
debt reduction, and what we're left with
is just the aerospace assets.
What do you think led him to sticking
with the aerospace assets versus going
with healthcare or Verova? It's just an
interesting choice. It might have just
been market size, but do you think
there's anything there in terms of what
led him to continue on with this
specific business line? If you go back
in time to 2020, the board awarded Larry
a one-time performance grant to
incentivize him to say it was at the
very high end of what you would normally
see, something like $200 million in
shares based on certain stock price
targets. It was a little bit
controversial at the time simply because
the share price was depressed given the
fact that we were reeling from the
pandemic. But it also aligned outcomes
between management and shareholders. And
similarly, a very similar grant was made
in 2024 again tied to operating metrics
but in smaller scale compared to the
2020 grant. As to why Larry decided to
become CEO of G Aerospace rather than
Verova or healthcare, couple of things I
would point to. One might have been the
fact that he was historically wellversed
in industrial businesses. So Danaher and
second perhaps it was an implicit
indicator of how strong aerospace was
compared to their other segments and he
wanted to be the CEO of the crown jewel
asset so to speak.
>> You referenced some of the market shares
that they have in this jet engine
business. Can you just bring us back in
time in terms of the origins of that
industry and that'll lead us on to how
GE has captured the share and foothold
that they have but maybe go back in
time. I have some sense of when jet
engines came around was probably
correlated to when airplanes came around
but maybe you can lay that out for us.
>> The jet engine business is nearly 100
years old. So it's fairly long time. It
was first invented in the 1930s here in
the UK. Actually the first jet engine
built in the US however was a GE engine
which incidentally was a copy of the
British engine developed by Frank
Whittle. Historically you would find
that as technologies develop they become
cheaper to manufacture and to scale. But
what we have observed in jet engines is
that that has not necessarily been the
case. Even inflation adjusted jet
engines still cost at least several
billion dollars to make. And if you look
at the most recent Pratt and Whitney
gear turbo fan engine, it reportedly
cost Pratt something like $10 billion.
Now, it's a good question to ask why
that is the case. I would suggest that
because jet engines are constantly
pushing at the leading edge of materials
technology and engineering and we're
tackling new problems at the frontier
that keeps costs high and entry barriers
high as well.
It's the type of product that I don't
mind if it's a little bit more expensive
as well given what it actually does and
how I might be a user of it. Let's
discuss G's evolution in that space in
terms of leading to this place where you
always hear about the duopoly at top in
terms of the OEMs with Boeing and
Airbus. Not so much about the rest of
the value chain. Who else is in the jet
engine market? I think you've referenced
Pratt and Whitney a few times, but how
has that evolved over time?
>> So, first to maybe set the scene, it's
worthwhile putting the industry in
context and why it's so hard to make a
jet engine. In simplest terms, the
barrier to entry into the industry is
the requirement to have both
extraordinary technical performance at
extraordinary low cost. So making a jet
engine at scale is one of humanity's
toughest technical challenges right up
there with semiconductor fabrication,
manufacturing biologics or even things
like reusable rockets. So this is a very
very hard technical challenge to
overcome. Just to give you a flavor of
what engines have to deal with in
commercial aerospace which we take for
granted every time you take a flight
within the hot section of the engine
inside the high pressure turbine the
temperatures can exceed the melting
point of alloys which when you stop to
think about it is quite mindboggling.
Similarly, engines have to withstand and
be tested extensively in a variety of
harsh conditions, including extreme
cold, extreme heat, dusty conditions,
including things like bird strikes,
which they have to be resilient against,
which happens more commonly than you
think. Even at the manufacturing level,
atomic scale defects can be
catastrophic. For example, the most
recent issue that Pratt and Whitney had
with the gear turboan, they found a
microscopic contaminant in the
manufacturing process which led to a
worldwide record of the entire fleet. So
even extremely small issues can cause
significant after effects and
significant catastrophic losses for the
engine makers. Now once you have solved
these technical problems, you now need
to go to convince Airbus and Boeing that
you can manufacture and supply this at
scale and then convince the airlines
that this will be reliable to operate
for decades on end all at a cost of
ownership that is competitive based on
sort of worldwide global aftermarket
support. And oh by the way, you also
need to sell at a loss to Airbus and
Boeing before you can see the first
profit from spare parts in five or 10
years time from the airlines. This is an
extraordinarily difficult industry with
very significant technical barriers in
addition to regulatory barriers where
rightly regulators require extensive
certification and safety testing of
aircraft and every single part that goes
into an aircraft including the engines.
>> It's a marvel in terms of [snorts] what
they've been able to do. Who's on the
other side of the spectrum beyond Boeing
and Airbus? What goes into those
partnerships and those relationships
that creates the ecosystem that now
exists where you do have certain parts
of the value chain entirely relying on
each other.
>> When you look at jet engine makers, the
primes, you only have three or four
companies who can do this at scale. GE
is one of them along with Saffron,
Rolls-Royce is one of them and Traton
Whitney, MTU. Given the history of the
industry, you can see that Rolls-Royce,
for example, collapsed in the 70s and
had to be nationalized trying to develop
the RB211 engine, which was ironically a
successful engine and the basis of their
current trend architecture, but they
almost went bankrupt doing it. And
similarly, if you think about stateowned
companies, including China's Comarmac,
which is steeped in manufacturing,
muscle in China, chose a GE or CFM
engine to power their last aircraft. And
while it's sort of developing its own
engine, it just shows you the barriers
to entry that even extremely scaled
players and serious new entrance face
when tackling this industry. Given these
challenges in developing engines, it is
not a surprise to see that most of the
companies in the space enter into sort
of risk and revenue sharing agreements
or joint ventures simply to mitigate the
risk and to share the risk and revenue
both when they are trying to develop new
engines. For GE, the most prominent of
that is in their narrow body segment
where they have a joint venture with
Saffron. It's a 50-50 joint venture with
Saffron called CFM International which
we spoke about before. Through the CFM
international program, you have very
strong presence that GE has in the
Boeing platforms which is soul source
and the Airbus platforms, not to mention
COMAC which is also soul source with GE
>> for that joint venture. I just have to
ask what is Saffron doing and what is GE
doing?
>> Historically CFM International has been
a 50/50 joint venture. GE historically
has done more on the hot side of the
engine and Saffron has done more on the
cold side of the engine, but effectively
everything is split 50/50 in the
partnership and it's a very
long-standing partnership almost 50
years old at this point. It's been one
of the best models of joint ventures and
risk and revenue sharing agreements in
the industry.
>> Interesting. Yeah. To have that
long-standing of a joint venture and to
be taking something as complex as this
and splitting it amongst two businesses.
So I can only imagine
>> technology also plays a role in terms of
how these market shares evolve. It is
not just the case that you only have a
few players and therefore you tend to
have consolidated market positions. When
it comes to choosing an engine, you have
two choices really that are being made.
One is at the Airbus Boeing level. They
can decide if they want to go soul
source which is a strategic decision as
well as a technical decision in terms of
how much more efficient an engine is
compared to the predecessor it is
replacing. For example, Boeing 737 is on
a sole source with GE, but Airbus offers
two engine options. And similarly,
airlines can also choose engines based
on their reliability. Most critically,
time on wing, which is a metric that
airline operators care a lot about in
terms of availability and reliability.
Remember that these engines need to fly
for 10 hours a day for years and years
at a stretch before they can be brought
in for a servicing. So the total cost of
ownership over 20 25 years which is a
life of an engine is extremely important
for airlines. So this combination of
factors in the industry so both the
barriers to entry we spoke about and the
choices that Airbus Boeing have made in
terms of soul source or dual source has
made the industry extremely consolidated
and GE a dominant player in the
industry. When I'm thinking about the
revenue model itself, I'm sure there's
this price that they're offering, but
there's got to be some scaled pricing
incentives. Can you talk a little bit
more about the revenue model, which
again, because these new fleets and
whatnot get scheduled out for such long
periods of time? I would imagine there's
visibility, but some of the more
interesting details and nuance to it
would be interesting to hear about.
Before we get into the revenue model,
it's important to think about who the
buyer is. Within commercial aerospace,
there are actually two distinct customer
segments. The first customer segments is
the aircraft airframers. So, Airbus and
Boeing and Comarmac. So, they make the
aircraft itself. Hence, the engine is
sold to them as an original equipment
provider. But because Airbus and Boeing
are so dominant in manufacturing, they
can exert enormous negotiating leverage
against engine makers and the entire
supply chain. So they have a huge
influence in terms of engine choice, in
terms of technology, whether or not they
want to offer engine options as we spoke
about just before. So there's not that
much profit on the OE sale for an engine
maker because of this. So you typically
sell the OE engine at a loss or break
even at best and make up for it in sort
of the aftermarket. Now the second
customer group that ties into the
aftermarket are the airlines. So once an
aircraft starts flying it's owned and
operated for 20 30 years by the likes of
Delta or American or Emirates or Ryan
Air. That industry i.e the airlines is a
very fragmented industry. There are
hundreds of airlines. So the engine
makers are in a much better position in
terms of negotiating leverage to make a
profit and they do because typically in
the aftermarket airlines have to bring
the engines in for servicing at some
point and typically if they don't choose
an OE spare part they lose the warranty
protection on the engine. So therefore
the engine makers tend to get spare
parts revenues which are very lucrative
and very high margin. So this bifocation
of one buyer who is sort of your
engineering customer another who is your
usage based customer also leads to
significant barriers to entry for new
ends and it informs sort of the revenue
model. When it comes to the revenue
model we have two different customer
groups. The first is the OE. If you look
at the leap engine which is the current
in production next generation engine for
GE the list price of a leap engine might
be something like 20 22 million. So
almost 20% the list price of the
aircraft itself. This is for delivering
to Airbus or Boeing or Comarmac.
Typically on the OE side, you sell at a
very deep discount. It can be up to 70
or 80%. Until the program is mature or
you're delivering spare engines. So you
generally end up making losses on the OE
side. So you have negative margins until
you get to maturity which the leap is
fast. At that point you start selling at
the OE on a break even basis. So you
still don't make any real profit margin
on the OE sale. If you look at GE for
example, the revenue per engine
typically is around $6 million. So very
different from the headline price of 20
22 million on the aftermarket side which
is the revenue that they get from
airlines and that last 20 25 30 years.
This is extremely profitable as spare
parts and service revenues are
effectively exclusive to the engine
makers and regulations mandate that you
need to bring in these engines for
servicing after a certain number of
flight cycles. So typically every six,
seven, eight years and airlines
typically don't want to use sort of
alternatives to the original spare parts
as it voids a warranty protection on it.
So this revenue stream is extremely
profitable. You're looking at something
like a 60% type gross margin on the
aftermarket. Now the mix within G's
commercial engine services segment is
3/4 service revenue and 25% OE. And
given overall margins of 25% you can see
how profitable the service component is.
Though none of the companies really
report this, it would not be unthinkable
if operating margins for the aftermarket
were 40% or better. And that is
overwhelmingly the most important
economic driver for engine makers. More
importantly, typical aircraft lives are
25 years plus. So from an NPV
perspective, this multi-deade
aftermarket profit is really what drives
value for GE.
And over the life of an engine, the
aftermarket can be three to four to five
times the OE sale. That really drives
the value for the business.
>> Now here in terms of upfront sale versus
services costs, sometimes 50/50 being a
model, but this feels like it's a little
bit different in terms of what's going
on, but it's a much steeper difference
in terms of how much is made on the back
end. I am just curious your point on the
engine sales being done at very steep
discounts up front and then that being
slowly closed in terms of what the
discount is as the program matures. Is
there anything to that? I just am a bit
surprised it's not smoothed out over the
entire life of the engine program or the
particular aircraft program. Do you know
what goes into that and what drives that
huge discount upfront? So the discounts
tend to be more in sort of the
commercial side of the business. This is
not a feature that you'll see in sort of
business jets or regional jets or even
military applications where it's a much
more consistent margin profile between
the OE and the aftermarket. The steep
discounts that you see on the OE side is
simply a function of the fact that
Airbus and Boeing are very powerful and
very consolidated and therefore they can
drive significant volume leverage on the
supply chain including GE and the engine
makers.
It's an interesting nuance that I can
somewhat understand. There's certain
aspects about it that I have a hard time
wrapping my brain around, but I
certainly understand the power they have
on the aftermarket. Can you just detail?
You went into exactly what's happening,
but a little bit more about the revenue
model there, whether there's actual
service contracts, warranties, comes at
a certain price upfront, just the
dynamics going on there. On the
aftermarket side, there are two main
types of revenue models for commercial
aircraft and engines. One is called the
time and materials model where airlines
pay for the spare parts when they do the
overhaul when they do what is called a
shop visit which happens every five or
six or seven years. So that's sort of
the traditional model. The second model
is long-term service agreements or in
the industry it's called revenue per
flight hour or power by the hour which
is effectively a subscription type of
revenue model. Here GE would offer a
perf flight R cost that the airlines can
pay. So they can convert sort of what is
effectively capex into opex and the cost
can but not always includes a cost of
overhaul and spare parts. So in a way GE
takes more risk. It's like selling
insurance contracts to the customer.
However, long-term contracts in the mix
more recently has been reducing
meaningfully and in many cases when
long-term service agreements are
offered, the spare parts or the
lifelimited parts as it's called are
often out of scope. So, the basic
difference between the two models is who
bears the risk of the engines being
reliable. In time and materials
contracts or in the time and materials
world, the airlines take the risk. So,
typically you see this when an engine
has proven reliability is very mature.
And in long-term service agreements, the
engine makers take the risk. So you
effectively have under written a certain
set of cost and reliability assumptions
in how you price that contract. For GE
to put some numbers around it, something
like 60% of the LEAP engines are under
long-term contracts of which 30% is
revenue per flight. So pay as you go. On
the widebody side, the proportions are a
bit higher. So 60 70% are on long-term
contracts and 60 to 80% of that is on a
pay by hour basis.
talking a little bit about the growth
model and how they grow. There's
probably some obvious ways just in terms
of new aircrafts entering the market,
but how would you lay that out in terms
of what that looks like strategically?
>> On the commercial side, overall
commercial travel is the tailwind here.
It is reported that something like three
out of four people in the world haven't
yet traveled on an airplane. However,
that's probably an overstatement in
terms of the growth potential. But every
time somebody posts something on
Instagram from a exotic location, that
obviously boosts the need and demand for
air travel. However, when you look at
long-term revenue passenger kilometers,
as it's called, RPKs, it tends to grow
in sort of the mid-s single digits,
which historically has been 2x GDP
growth. Now, that multiplier varies
substantially between developed and
emerging markets. In develop markets the
multipliers or clusters around one it
could be anywhere from half GDP growth
to one and a half times GDP growth but
on the emerging market side is
significantly higher so it's 3x GDP
growth for the next 10 years both Airbus
and Boeing have given long-term forecast
for the industry for the next 10 years
or so it's reasonable to assume that air
travel grows at one and a half times GDP
in addition to that for GE in particular
they have more levers for growth in
terms So their own fleets growing faster
than the rest of the market. So for GE,
the Leap engine is over time expected to
be twice as big as a predecessor engine,
the CFM56 that it's sort of replacing.
So the growth of the Leap fleet will
more than offset the retirements of the
older CFM56 fleet. And even in the older
CFM56 fleet, something like 40% of the
engines haven't really come in even for
their first shop visit. In fact, if you
look at shop visits in 2025, they are
roughly the same as they were in 2019.
So there's a lot of latent growth still,
which is extremely predictable because
eventually the engines have to come in
for a short positive. In addition to
this, aftermarket pricing continues to
be quite strong. It's particularly
strong today since the pandemic, but
will remain at least sort of midsleits
towards the end of this decade. So this
tailwind from the growth of their
installed fleet plus pricing means G's
commercial services revenues could grow
at something like an 8 to 10% clip very
predictably with high visibility over at
least the next 5 years. And when did the
LEAP engine come into service first?
>> The LEAP entered into service circa
2016. So it's still a very young
program. And the typical aircraft
program from inception to development to
retirement is four decades. And the
useful life of an aircraft is 25 years.
So still a very very young program that
will deliver earnings for decades to
come.
>> And then on the defense side, I'm sure
it's exposure to defense budgets. Is
there anything else that goes into that
growth equation
>> on defense? It does tend to grow in line
with the defense budgets with an
additional uplift ahead when based on
which programs are participating and
more generally as we touched on before
RTX and Pratt are much bigger and more
dominant on the defense side and GE has
lost out on some of the key growth
programs over the last sort of cycle.
But if you look at more recent share of
DoD spending, both Pratt and G have
gotten their fair share. So I expect
this to be something like a 4% type of
growth segment.
>> Just in terms of the cyclicality of the
revenue, there's the longer cycles of
aircrafts coming into service and when
there's major fleet upgrades, but in
terms of more macro cyclicality, CO is
probably not a great analog or scenario
to use in terms of how aggressive of an
environment that was. But what would you
point to just in terms of if you do see
general economic weakness, how exposed
would the business be to something like
that?
>> There are several factors to consider
here. Firstly, air travel which is the
end demand is more or less discretionary
to a large degree and airlines are
cyclical given their high fixed cost,
high operating leverage business model
who are the key customer in the
aftermarket side of the business. And
today if you look at load factors across
industry it's pretty much maxed out at
low 80s maybe 83% 84% which is
unprecedentedly high. So any decline in
air traffic will affect airline
profitability quite significantly.
Having said that however GE Pratt MTU
are much more insulated from this due to
a few reasons. The first is engine
maintenance is not discretionary. is
literally mission critical for airlines
and it's mandated by regulation. You can
defer some of these expenditures but
eventually it has to happen and related
to other costs like fuel which tend to
be a large portion for an airline this
is a fairly small portion of airline
opex. In addition, given the soul source
nature of the aftermarket spare parts,
GE has fairly significant pricing power
which they have demonstrated through
multiple cycles over the last 10 20
years including the pandemic where price
increases went through. So there are
multiple levels of protection and
insulation for the engine makers in an
economic downturn. It is also worth
mentioning that the cyclicality of the
engine makers has become much better
since the financial crisis. You
generally have better balance sheets
overall today. You have more disciplined
management across all of the companies
as well as more resilience through the
pandemic. The closest comparable for GE
operationally would be Saffron given
their joint venture in CFM
International. And if you look at
Saffron's results through the pandemic,
they reported positive free cash flow
even during 2020 when air traffic
practically ground to a halt. So I would
suggest that the businesses have become
much more resilient and crisis ready
overall compared to the previous cycle
including the pandemic
>> on margins. You've laid out some of the
difference in terms of revenues and the
margin mix that you might see from a
pickup in a certain revenue line, but
can you lay out what that looks like for
the business as a whole? For GE, the
overall margin expansion that you've
seen in the reported numbers has largely
been driven by portfolio rationalization
much more than individual operating
performance improvement at GE Aerospace.
For example, where Nova was lossmaking
which depress overall reported margins
for GE. If you take G aerospace
specifically and within it commercial
engine services like for like margins
have always been quite robust even
outside the pandemic for example.
hovering around 20%ish even before Larry
Culp took over. You can also see that in
Saffron's reported numbers as well over
the last 10 years or so around 20% as
well in terms of operating margins.
Rolls-Royce more recently has reported
25% and historically has been 18% last
year and MTU aerospace within their
equivalent commercial engines business
reports sort of a 25 26% kind of margin.
So it's a very very profitable business.
GE in particular in the last few years
between 20 to 23 to 25 margins have
improved not to the same degree as the
overall group margin suggest but
something like 500 basis points of
margin improvement thanks to both
pricing power and efficiencies that
Larry Kulp has brought about
>> on the overall capital intensity of the
business. It was interesting to hear
that Saffron generated positive free
cash flow in the midst of COVID. What
does the capex intensity look like? What
are some of the aspects in terms of
earnings and all the way to free cash
flow conversion?
>> There are a few nuances here. If you
look at the headline capex numbers,
headline capex for G runs at a shade
below 3% of revenues and about 10 or 15%
of EBIT. So, it's fairly low capital
intensity. Earnings quality is also
pretty high with pretty much 100% of
conversion of earnings into free cash
flow. However, it's worth bearing in
mind that capex intensity at a point in
time for this business can be quite
misleading one way or the other. The
correct framing is from a cash irra
perspective because engines cost a lot
to develop and they suffer a lot of
losses in the early phases and then they
mature as the aftermarket earnings come
through they throw off a lot of cash and
are much much higher margins towards a
mature part of the cycle. So when you
look at current capex intensity you have
to frame it within the context of a
fairly mature cycle where most of the
engine makers including GE are entering
sort of a harvest phase of cash flows.
For instance at GE capex is now running
slightly below DNA given the harvest
phase but obviously that is not going to
be sustainable over the very long term.
The better marker of capital intensity
is probably return on capital. There are
a couple of things to consider here for
GE. GE has gone through a fairly intense
transformation in the last few years. So
the accounts still reflect the
vestigages of that. It still has a
legacy insurance business which is in
runoff. It's got a pension deficit. It
has significant goodwill on the balance
sheet. And there are contract assets and
liabilities based on the long-term
service agreements that they sign with
airlines. So if you strip these out of
their accounts and adjust for some of
the intangible assets being operating in
nature and try to get to a return on
tangible operating capital employed, you
get to something like 20 or 25% on a
cash basis. And that's a fairly good
indicator of what the return profile of
the business is. As a sense check,
Saffron is somewhere around 20 25% as
well. MTU and Rolls-Royce are around 16
18%. So this is a fairly good return on
capital business there. is very healthy
but they're not spectacular. What I
would suggest however is that what you
lose in ultra high returns on capital
you make up for in durability and
visibility. All of the engine makers so
GE saffron MTU Rolls-Royce they
participate in programs with useful
engine lives of 25 plus years and much
more importantly it's a highly visible
highly certain earning stream thanks to
the regulations around safety and
servicing and shop position. So I would
frame the return on capital within this
context of unusually high visibility and
durability as well as unusually high
barriers to entry. You're unlikely to
wake up tomorrow and read that an AI
startup has launched a new jet engine.
So this is a very protected, highly
visible, highly predictable earnings
profile that you're looking at.
>> What does capital allocation look like
and pairing with that? What do they do
with the cash flows that they do have?
So G management have talked about all
excess cash flows coming back to
shareholders something like 70%.
Dividend payout runs at something like
30% and the rest is buybacks. Of course
whether the buybacks add value or not
depends on the valuation the stock is
trading at but at least management
intent is to be very disciplined with
shareholder capital which is very very
consistent with Larry's tenure at Danah.
It's a fascinating snapshot of an
industry and really the whole value
chain when you think about the actual
risks here. What stands out the most to
you beyond the headline things that can
pop out?
>> The complex supply chain and the reason
the industry is so hard to get into also
gives rise to hundreds of technical
challenges every day that you have to
deal with. So that's a risk. More
specifically and more topically uh time
on wing and reliability has been a key
risk factor for most of the engines of
the current generation of engines. Pratt
GTF is suffering from it right now with
the potential fix on the way. Even the
leap is still only maturing into the
reliability that its predecessor had the
CFM56. That's an ongoing challenge
especially in the earlier parts of the
ramp up when the engines are still quite
young. GE in particular has benefited
from the troubles at Prattton Whitney
with the GTF, but it's something to
watch whether or not some of the market
share shifts that you've seen will
revert against GE once Pratt fixes the
issues and the GTF advantage enters into
service for example. But that's more or
less es and flows and the cut and thrust
of the business. The much more longer
term risk is measured in multiple
decades. This is a long cycle business.
So when you get it right, it endures.
But the reverse is also true. If you
study history, you know that Prattton
Whitney was maybe 60% of the commercial
fleet in 1995 and now is less than 20%.
So even the mighty fall, GE is currently
very well placed, but they need to stay
relevant to keep that market leadership.
The first threat I would point to on a
structural basis is that of technology.
GE has gone all in on open rotor
architecture, the open fan architecture
for the next generation aircraft, which
may be at least a decade away. So, it's
not anything short-term. Their argument
has been that an open rotor with no
casing reduces heat, which improves
durability, and they believe that it's
the only way to get to sort of a 20%
fuel burn improvement in the next
generation. If you look at sort of the
bypass ratios for typical engines, they
all hover around sort of the 10 to 12
times to one ratio and open rotor might
be four to 5x that. So 40 to 50 times.
So step change in the architecture of
the engine, it could be a gamecher for
GE if they get it right. Having said
that, Pratt and MTU and ROS are pursuing
a variant of the geared architecture
which is possibly lower risk but
possibly lower upside as well compared
to GE which is higher risk and higher
upside. So it's a bit too early to tell.
It really depends on how technology
progresses, how and when Airbus and
Boeing decide to go with these
architectures and when they have to make
that choice as well as how the airlines
receive it in terms of reliability and
operational advantages.
On the side of the customer, is there
anything as it relates to changes with
Boeing or just how aircrafts are
produced that you would point to in
terms of risk?
>> In terms of manufacturing, it's always a
challenge. The development of a new
engine is pretty hard to begin with, but
scaling it into production into tens of
thousands of engines is a order of
magnitude even more difficult than
designing the engine. From a production
perspective,
GE is now gone through the worst of the
leap ramp in terms of the difficulty and
the learning curve. And if you look at
how the production is slated to continue
for the leap, you can make a good case
that the losses from the OE side for
leap should reduce quite substantially
over the next 5 years to make it break
even. That gives GE an additional level
for earnings growth as well because
they're in a fortunate position that the
CFM56 the previous generation engine
fleet is retiring more slowly than
expected and therefore that gives them a
cash cushion so to speak as the leap
ramps into service. So overall that cash
flow profile is going to be quite
favorable over the next 5 to 10 years.
>> How about Boeing's stance in the
industry? GE obviously being a preferred
partner there. Whether it's Boeing
changing themselves or seeing Boeing
lose share, how do you frame that risk
and whether it's a real or less
substantiated one? Boeing historically
has shown a preference to GE as an
exclusive engine partner, but that is
not necessarily cost in stone for their
next generation narrow body aircraft.
For example, Boeing can choose to dual
source given it's a very large market.
Airbus is already dual source for
example in the current generation and
airlines generally tend to prefer more
options. Having said that multiple
engine options is a logistical nightmare
generally which explains Boeing's logic
and going for soul source positions.
There is a possibility that the
competition develops a credible engine
program for Boeing to consider. If that
happens g 100% market share can only go
down. Of course, they can fight for
exclusivity, but it might come at a cost
if Boeing negotiate hard or that the
economics are not particularly
favorable.
>> And then just in terms of competitive
threats, we've had breakdowns on
businesses like Haiko and Transdime
where there's PMA parts, they sits
outside of the, you know, original
manufacturers. How does that impact a
business like GE? Uh on the PMA parts, I
think HAO is probably the exemplar of a
fantastically well-run aerospace
business that focus on focuses on PMA
parts. Uh the engine business has been
historically and continues to be
relatively more protected from the PMA
parts. Uh just to back up very briefly,
PMA parts refers to parts manufacturer
approval, PMA, which is effectively in
simple terms the private label or the
store brand version of the original
parts that the manufacturers produced.
The earliest and the most significant
threat uh that the ecosystem faced from
PMA parts was from Prattton Whitney who
tried to do something like 20 LLP parts,
life limited parts on a PMA basis on the
CFM56 engine, the GE engine, uh
reportedly cost several billion dollars
possibly and failed spectacularly. Uh so
that just tells you even a very credible
end or a industrial scale player even
within the ecosystem finds it very hard
to manufacture as well as sort of
credibly go to customers and steal share
away from the OES. The reasons for these
uh reason the reasons for this is
severalfold. The first is the technical
complexity the regulatory and the
certification requirements. Uh and the
sec and the the second reason is most of
the market today so more than half the
market today is with leasing companies
who are effectively against the use of
PMA parts. Uh it voids the warranties
for example that the OES provide and
even the OES the original equipment
engine makers provide material service
agreements uh other forms of uh
protection uh that sort of make it very
hard for a new PMA part enter to write
the business case. Keep also in mind
that in the early part of an engine's
life cycle, you are not necessarily
going to find uh good reliability data.
The engine needs to be flying for a
certain number of flight cycles before
it becomes predictable in its behavior.
So the real addressable market for a PMA
parts maker is only towards the latter
half of an engine program. So when you
sort of peel all those layers back, the
true addressable market for a PMA part
engine is much smaller than it initially
appears. On the aircraft side for
example it is very different because
Airbus and Boeing don't really offer a
comparable sort of aftermarket solution
whereas in the engine land uh you see a
long-term service agreements and the
spare parts that the OES uh effectively
try and capture very effectively
>> just in terms of valuing these types of
businesses. you could either talk about
your approach or just how the market
typically values these businesses and
whatever types of frameworks or things
that you would point to that stand out.
>> I think valuation for these companies
the method that the market uses tells
you more about where we are in the cycle
rather than anything about the value
itself. So in a way value is in the eye
of the beholder. During periods of
crisis like in the pandemic for example
or previously in the financial crisis
you could do liquidation value analysis
based on each engine in the fleet and
the remaining useful cash flows you can
extract from it to arrive at an NPV per
engine in a fairly straightforward way
given that there's very very predictable
and visible earning streams that you're
looking at. In a way the install base
can be valued like a bond an inflation
protected bond and there have been times
when the market has priced in distress
and these companies have been available
for willp purchase below liquidation
value. There is good logic to that
approach I would say because
theoretically each engine has a finite
useful life much like a toll road or a
pharmaceutical drug pipeline. So I would
suggest that conceptually this would be
a good way of valuing it. Having said
that during normal periods like today
where we are sort of midcycle let's say
or when it's cruising altitude the cash
flow multiples or earnings multiples
tend to become the norm or become the
short hand. For example today GE is
priced at something like 40 times free
cash flow. If you believe in low double
digit growth in revenues and sort of low
teens to mid- teens growth in earnings
per share and free cash flow per share
over five and 10 years you're buying it
on 10 times earnings in 10 years time.
So I would suggest that there's quite a
bit of optimism about the future in the
share price today. But again value tends
to be in the eye of the beholder. My
observation more broadly is that in this
sector value opportunities do arise
either during a travel crisis like we
saw in the pandemic or a recession or a
macro shock or during periods where
there might be a stock specific issue
like what happened with MTU around the
GTF powered metal issues which caused a
recall of the fleet and the stock
dropped something like 10 or 11 times
earnings. Outside of those environments,
these stocks tend to be priced on
earnings multiples based on expected
growth and the certainty of that growth
and especially in an environment like
today where that combination of
predictable solid earnings growth is
rare. Today's valuations reflect that.
>> This has been a fascinating look and
lens into a specific industry and then
how GE fits in it. What would you say
stands out as the lessons that you can
take away from GE apply elsewhere?
>> Given the technical complexity of making
jet engines, it's hard to learn from GE
in that regard. It's not like we can
learn to make jet engines ourselves by
observing GE. This is a case of do not
try this at home type of thing. But
jokes apart, the less obvious learnings
from the engine business model is that
the bifocation of the buyer and the user
is a recurring pattern in many enduring
businesses. For engines, you have Airbus
and Boeing as OE customer, but the
long-term user being airlines. And
whenever you have this kind of
bifocation, you set up conditions for a
more complicated path for a new entrant
as you now have to solve sort of a 3D
puzzle so to speak. The other insight
that I draw from G is the importance of
management culture and how some cultures
emphasize growth and others emphasize
durability. The most obvious one is sort
of the importance of management culture
in GE. So books like lights out by
Thomas Gita and Ted man document some of
the missteps that happened at GE in what
became a culture that prioritized growth
over durability amplified by balance
sheet leverage. So even the mighty fall
might be another lesson and durability
rather than sort of a focus on growth is
another lesson. And the last one that
comes to mind is how scarcity can drive
value. There are not that many companies
in the world that can do what GE does
and that scarcity has what has provided
the foundation for Larry Culp to come in
bring in focus and crystallize that
latent value embedded in the franchise.
>> Well Romesh this has been a true
pleasure. Thank you very much for
joining us today. Bless [music] you,
Matt.
>> To find more episodes of breakdowns
ranging from Costco to Visa to Madna or
to sign up for our weekly summary, check
out join colossus.com. [music]
That's jolsus.com.